Hey everyone, happy to have you here on the channel and in a moment on the podcast.
So yeah, let's just go ahead and get this kicked off.
Those of you who are listening, happy to have you here.
So with that, let's go.
Steve, Paul, Ofec, and Predian, welcome all to Talk Python.
Happy to have you here.
Thanks for having us.
Excellent.
Yeah, you bet.
New for some of you.
Welcome back for some others.
So either way, still great.
Let's just go around the video square here
and have you all just do a quick introduction.
I know, like I said, some of you have been here before,
but it may have been a while.
So Steve, you want to kick us off?
Sure.
My name is Steve Dower, Zuba on Twitter and GitHub in various places
and CPython core developer.
And I actually got involved in Python in the first place
to help with packaging.
And while I'm not kind of officially closely involved
with packaging as much now, I still help contribute.
Yeah, awesome.
And you're also pretty notable for helping
step up Python's game on Windows.
Yeah, along with some of the others in this panel, actually.
We've got a few of the Windows contributors here.
But yeah, that's kind of my focus area.
Yeah, awesome.
Paul, welcome.
Happy to have you here.
Hi.
Nice to be here.
I'm Paul. I'm a core Python developer and a pip maintainer, the two things I'm most involved in.
I'm also, for my sins, the PEP delegate for packaging standards, if you like.
So basically anything that's a PEP around interoperability between packaging tools
comes to me ultimately for the decision on how it's going.
I've been around in packaging for years now,
so I've got quite a lot of the history behind me,
which is also useful in this type of discussion.
Yeah, absolutely.
very much involved with pip.
And that's at the heart of this, right?
That's probably the earliest tool there.
Yeah.
Yeah, welcome.
Hey, yeah.
I'm the primary maintainer of Hatch,
which has been around for a few years.
But more recently, I rewrote it from scratch
to better satisfy kind of what I wanted
and what more users wanted the UX to look like.
It comes with a build back end hatchling too that is also a bit new.
So yeah, my primary focus is the user experience.
Making things as easy and less prone to errors as possible with perspective and save and stuff like that.
Excellent. Yeah.
So Hatch is in the general category of these higher level tools that work on top of the lower level Python ones to provide more consistent workflows for doing things.
And that's kind of the heart of this discussion, honestly, is like, what should those workflows be?
What tools should be responsible for it and so on?
We're not quite there yet because Pragyan still has to introduce himself.
Indeed.
Hi, I'm Pragyan.
I am a maintainer on pip, Split, and a few more Python packaging stuff.
I'm also the maintainer of Tomo, as well as, well, I guess I'm the newest C-Python code
developer, as of the recording, at least.
So, yeah, that's me.
Yeah, welcome.
You're doing a lot of cool stuff.
So we're all here together because, let me pull this up my screen really quick.
Because of this discussion over on discuss.python.org, it's multi-part, which is notable for how long just a part of it is.
Python Packaging Strategy Discussion.
And part one, if you scroll down just a little bit, it says that there are 272 replies and 150 minutes of reading time.
And that's before we get to the related blogs, the GitHub issues, part two, the survey results, all of these things.
So this is quite a discussion, and a lot of people seem to care a lot about it.
I don't think you've brought your screen up there for us, Michael.
Oh, I have not, have I?
There we go.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So let's start the discussion with maybe a summary of what's going on here.
This was posted by Shamika, who unfortunately couldn't be here today, was going to be here, but can't make it.
So I'm going to have to let whoever feels most qualified to jump in on this.
Who wants to sort of set the stage for what this discussion was about?
Paul, you look like you might be willing to bite.
Paul looked like everybody else was backing off that.
Yeah, one of the things that we've wanted to do for some time now is sort of get a better feel for how the user community views packaging.
Shamika joined the packaging community as the project manager for the packaging effort as a whole.
And one of the things she initiated in that was getting a survey done to effectively try and answer those questions.
What do the users think of the packaging ecosystem?
What do they think of how things are going?
What do they want from Python packaging?
There was a fair bit.
I don't honestly know how big the response was, but we got quite a decent response from it, which basically got summarized up in a couple of feedback documents.
Yeah, thanks.
Yeah, I think here we go.
There's a PDF that I'll link to that has the actual survey responses.
Yeah, and it turns out that putting a banner on PyPI.org seems to be the winner.
in terms of reaching out to people who care.
We have almost 8.7K responses
and 7.9K out of those are from PyPI.
So that's more than 90%.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, sorry, I didn't mean to cut you.
I just want to add a little D there.
So basically from that,
the discussions on Python discourse
are following on from that, taking a number of the messages that came out of the survey
and essentially getting everybody in the packaging community together to talk about,
you know, what does this mean? What do we expect we can do about this? How do we address
the comments that have been made where do we take it there are a number of discussions planned i
don't know how many um the first one
radians either waving at me or suggesting it's five
um the first one is the one that we've had already the sort of main strategy
There are a number of follow-ups to that, one of which has just started, but most of which haven't taken place yet.
So where we're at now, the initial discussion, which was the thread that you showed previously, that went on for about a month on discourse, generated quite a lot of discussion.
And we now need to sort of digest that and understand where that leaves us and what actions we can take from it, what conclusions we can draw, how we pull that together into something that we can actually do something with, I guess.
Yeah.
And I think it's worth adding that this is not kind of an unusual thing for our packaging kind of participants.
We have quite a significant history of a few comments kicking off a huge discussion that flows and fragments and drags on for hundreds of posts.
And this one actually feels a bit different.
This one feels like there's a real sort of commitment from certainly some of the main players who are involved in it.
And if you look at the regular posters in that other thread, then you'll see a lot of us up near the top.
but there's also a number of other people involved who are,
it feels more serious this time.
It feels like we really,
not just feeling or recognizing pain
that we've always kind of seen and known is out there
for a lot of people using it,
but it feels like we're kind of at a place
where something has to give.
And I feel like we're getting closer and closer
to being able to change whatever it is
that needs to change to make that give.
So I think it's an exciting set of discussions,
though it is long and meandering and drawn out and occasionally a little frustrating.
I've taken a few breaks during it just to cool off,
and I suspect some of the others in here have as well.
But a lot of it's nothing new.
It's nothing that we haven't heard or come across before.
Having it laid out the way the survey did gave us a real kind of strong starting point,
And there's just a lot of, honestly, discussion, a lot of things that have to be talked through because we're all different people with different backgrounds, different areas, and trying to get aligned well enough to then align the random group of volunteers who make up this group.
It's like we jokingly call it a packaging authority, but that's the biggest joke in the world.
And so to actually align the volunteers working on independent projects takes a huge, you know, we've got to build up that momentum and that alignment before we can even start, you know, changing projects.
Yeah, there it is.
Yeah, there's a couple of levels of this, right?
I mean, as a broad Python community, we got to get enough alignment that people will back it.
But there's a bunch of people who would have to build whatever variant of this you all might pick.
And you've got to agree on that as well. And many of them are working on different tools.
Pryden mentioned Flit and Pip. Offect is Hatch and Hatchling. Paula's Pip.
In some sense, the discussion might be, well, should pip take on the responsibilities of Flit?
Or should it do less? And Hatch takes on it.
You know, there's this give and take, which I think is going to be an interesting thing to see play out.
We've had a thousand flowers bloom sort of moment, I think, with the packaging.
We've seen a bunch of different tools come along, but that's also led to, I think, confusion with people who are like, well, one blog post said use poetry.
Now this one says use Hatch.
This other one said don't use any of them.
What do I do?
I'm new.
I'm confused.
Yeah.
Well, before we move on, just sort of summarizing your thoughts of this overall discussion, just kicking it off.
OFAC and
you haven't got a chance to weigh in. OFAC,
what do you think? Yeah, I will say
although the main
sentiment about the
takeaway from the survey was
that people wanted more unification
and sort of guidance,
I think the threat itself
was not as much about that
but just
like a myriad
issues. So only one
of the issues was actually
about tools and user experience.
Other people brought up other longstanding issues.
We want more integration with Conda.
That's a large topic there.
Some other people want better support
for extension modules and detection of GPU,
stuff like that.
So there's lots of needs from various communities
that also have to be worked out.
It's not all just about user experience and things like that.
Sure.
That makes sense.
Prejin, you wrote a huge, great long blog post on this,
which we're going to get to a little bit.
But higher level first, what do you think?
Higher level summary of the discussion is gone.
I guess it's been productive.
One of the things that Steve gave me the word for is level setting.
There's a lot of sort of bringing everyone up to context on,
or bringing everyone up to the same amount of information
and sort of understanding other use cases that you don't have yourself,
even though you're right, that supports that and things like that.
Having all the discussion happen has helped bring everyone up to the same page on these things.
One thing I want to push back on that Steve just said, which is sort of the Python Packaging Authority does not have authority, is probably not true.
We do have a goal here to get the authority to decide on things directly delegated from the Supreme Council.
I heard the cats. That's about as far as it goes.
Yeah. I mean, there is a level of authority involved, but it's limited because, well, we'll get on to the structure of the PIPA, I guess.
But there's a lot of independent projects, a lot of independent people.
And one of the things that this discussion did was bring everybody together and get us interacting maybe more than we had done.
I think historically, it's probably worth also saying that historically, packaging started off very much one or two tools that did everything, things like disk utils and setup tools.
They were it.
And there were all sorts of issues at that time, which meant that we consciously tried to take a view that we were going to enable diversity, allow other tools to get into the mix.
We started by looking at how we could make alternatives to set up tools work, how we could give people choice there.
And from there, it's grown. And we've now got choice in a lot of areas that we never used to have choice in.
And that was that wasn't an accident. That was a conscious decision that we made to try to give some level of competition, some level of innovation that hadn't been there beforehand.
One of the things that this discussion has done, well, one of the things the survey did has brought home to us that a downside of that is that everybody's confused as heck, that nobody knows what to do now because we've just given them 100 million choices.
And that's a very fair comment. It's not it wasn't the intention, but it was an obvious consequence of that diversity that we promoted.
Now what we need to do and what we're trying to do on the back of the discussion, on the back of what we've learned is try and pull that back together again.
We've got all these tools now. We want to try and, if not exactly unify them, but certainly give a clearer picture, a more this is how you do things story.
And part of the problem with that, one of the things that Getting Everybody Talking has done, it's made it clearer that we do need to work together. We can't keep competing because the users of the tools are just lost knowing what to do.
And so we need to to bring things together. But nobody is certainly I don't think at this point anybody is saying that we're going to shut down all the other tools.
All the people working on them have wasted their time. That's not the idea at all.
But we still need to navigate how we get a more unified approach within the context that we've got, which is a lot of people working on their own vision of how they are serving a subset of the overall group of users.
And like Steve said, I think it's been really useful getting everybody together and everybody getting each other's perspectives.
we now need to work out what to do with that, frankly.
I think one thing that stood out to me
from reading the survey,
and we can poke through some of the interesting questions
and responses there.
I feel like there's two users
that almost need two approaches.
There are people who are creating libraries
and shipping them to PyPI
and their kind of core Python developer folks,
not core developers,
but they live and breathe Python
and they build Python things
and stuff like Pydantic or FastAPI and so on.
They might need the flexibility and the diversity.
Sarah, the new grad student in the biology department
that needs to get pandas to work
and she knows that Python is her path forward,
she shouldn't have to decide whether to use flit or hatch or straight pip plus maybe pip-tools.
And these are two very different use cases.
And almost like bringing them together to what's the best of those two solutions together seems almost maybe the wrong.
You might make both groups unhappy going down that path.
If we bring together the current 8,000 tools, it's going to make 7,999 groups unhappy.
I mean, this is part of the challenge.
though I think an interesting thing there and probably about halfway through this mega thread
it kind of clicked at least for me I think some people had mentioned it earlier that there's really
two two big categories of tools kind of as you say there's the tools for packaging and the tools for
using packages which includes what seems to be the biggest issue is the environment managers it's the
virtual environment creation, you know, which is kind of half of poetry.
It's, but not the other half, a big part of Hatch, but not the other half.
It's none of Flit.
It's none of, you know, setup tools.
It's like, those are purely about building packages.
And it's on this side, the building packages where we've invested in kind of creating and
driving that diversity.
And I think that's worked really well.
We've got a range of standards that make them interoperable at the right places so that
pip can take kind of any of these backends and trigger them correctly.
source code written to, to provide metadata for any of these backends can be, be easily
transferred between a lot of them.
and, and that seems to mostly work.
And it's a situation where, again, as you say, the deep in Python maintainers have
a choice in what backend they want to use.
And what kind of clicked is people were saying, you know, we want less diversity.
And a lot of us were going, well, the diversity is in the backend.
So if you want less, then we have to combine the back ends.
But I think what clicked is that, no, that's not what they're wanting because it is the
new newcomer to Python who just wants it to work.
Who's trying to choose between all of these environment managers.
and especially when you throw a condor in there as well, which is just so
fundamentally different in how it behaves from the ones that kind of rely on pi pi directly
that we already have that divide and the diversity has shown up on the on this side uncontrolled
uncontrolled we didn't set out to see poetry created or see pipenv created or any of these
but it's there and how do we rein in something that has grown up all by itself completely outside
of anything that we've ever tried to control.
Yeah, especially now that it's going, yeah.
I was just going to say, one thing that struck me in that discussion was I'm really quite
happy with a lot of the, like Steve says, the back-end tools, all that sort of stuff.
But it occurred to me that when I'm just writing little hobby programs and things like that
for myself. I'm with everybody else. Packaging is horrible. I just want to say, start a project,
start up a notebook, do something. And it's really hard. And it hadn't occurred to me until we had
this discussion, but that's very much the two sides of the user equation. And we've really not
put as much effort into the just wants to use Python to do their job side of the user base,
then we should. And tools like Hatch and PDM is another one, Poetry is another one.
They are addressing that. And I actually went off and started exploring them. I thought,
hey, there's cool stuff going on here that I really wasn't as conscious of as I could have been.
So, yeah, absolutely.
We need to look at that side as well now, I think.
Yeah, I agree.
The economy here we're talking about is libraries versus applications.
So as people have mentioned, it is very easy now to build the library and test it.
And that's due in large part to the standards that we made to allow diversity for the build back end.
So that's very good.
But yeah, it's where the applications are that's the hard part now.
And I think at least one of the missing features that I think we should devote resources to,
and I know Brett isn't here, but locked files is something that we desperately need.
And poetry has their own implementation of locked files and dependency resolution.
So does PDM, but there's nothing standard for that.
And yeah, I think that should be the next step, I think, for applications.
While we're talking about the future and sort of where we are, I will point out part of the reason we're seeing a bunch of this is because we've solved some of the harder problems already.
We are at a point where, oh, I'm having difficulties installing Pandas and figuring out how to work for that.
and not, I can't install Pandas.
- That's a good point.
That's a good point.
- Or I can't publish Pandas or whatever.
So we have been solving problems as we go.
It's just, we're gonna keep seeing more and more problems,
especially in a user base this large,
there's always gonna be more interesting
and really difficult problems to solve.
- I think a lot of the people who are now just trying
to get on with using Python for their day job.
Probably when we were starting the process
of moving away from setup tools, they didn't even exist.
Python wasn't that popular in those days.
There's a new set of users who are coming along
with a new set of problems.
And if we don't keep our eye on what people are trying to do
with Python, we'll get left behind, I guess.
We won't be relevant and they won't have any
solutions for what they're trying to do. And a lot of them came
in because they believed Python was easy because we've got a reputation
for being easy. They wouldn't be frustrated if they thought it was going
to be impossible and then found out that they wouldn't be frustrated.
They wouldn't be happy, but they'd be satisfied. It's because they've come in expecting
this great experience that everyone's talking about and and we're just not able to deliver it
in in enough cases that the frustration comes in and we get that as you know we all get hit by it as
well yeah i am quite uh optimistic about it though i i think one person brought up a good point
in one of the recent discourse uh threads that like despite the hardships with packaging and
everything we are discussing here.
Python has gained massively in popularity and usage,
despite all these obstacles.
So yeah, I'm pretty optimistic that we
can satisfy people's needs.
Yeah.
I'm too.
I think Prydian really hit on it.
I remember long ago that certain things wouldn't install.
Sorry, you couldn't give this a compile,
or this other thing wouldn't work right.
It hadn't really occurred to me explicitly,
but I haven't seen those errors for a real long time.
- Yeah, and there's a lot of work
that's gone into build backends to make that possible.
Certainly for Linux users, the huge amount of effort
that went into defining the many Linux standard,
which is kind of the base layout of system libraries
and where they're expected to be on a system
so that people can build a binary package for Linux
that can assume that those libraries are there
and distribute those has meant that, yeah,
a lot of the time when you go to install something,
you'll get already built, already compiled packages
that are just ready to go.
And kind of the problem that that's raised up
is we've taken the really obvious problem
of you don't have a compiled package yet
up to the point where you have a compiled package
that is subtly incompatible with some other compiled package,
which can be really subtle
It can be one of those 99% of the times it works fine, and then the other time it just segfaults and everything dies.
Or it may be subtle data corruption.
Like there's a million little things that can suddenly go wrong there, and we're starting to see some of those come up.
Certainly the people in the data science side of things saw them come up quicker because they use a lot more of these complex packages,
and they do interact with each other, and they do check things like numerical stability.
A lot of the rest of us don't worry about that kind of stuff most of the time.
and so like yeah this works this yeah we'll put it out there maybe if wheel existed before conda
people would have just pushed harder on wheel potentially and conda might not exist not saying
it shouldn't exist but that might it might not have been a bad enough problem to make it no i
agree like conda came into existence because the solutions that were there weren't able to satisfy
it and it was so far like just the distance from where we were at that point because at that point
like eggs probably no one probably no one watching even remembers eggs i'm sure paul does
uh at that point it was uh ofec may as well i'm not sure how long you've been involved mate um
but yeah it was like it was a very different world and the distance to get there just looked so
impossible but yeah if we'd been at wheels then they may have said well this little tweak to
wheels will make it work for us and who knows where we might have been then yeah it's it's quite
possible i i can't judge honestly but it's quite possible that conda is where wheels will be in
a number of years i think there are there are fundamental reasons why
that might not be the case and we may have to find different ways of dealing with the problems but
yeah there's the these sort of really difficult really basically not solved technical problems
it's not that
Python is
struggling with something that's easy
there are no
languages or environments
anywhere
that have really solved these problems
so you know
we're trying to find solutions as we go along
and I think
in spite of
what Steve is saying
I think having an 80-90%
solution
often is
plenty good enough. I don't want to say that we should abandon the users who really need
that because they are on the forefront of things like AI research and data science and they're
doing incredible work which they can't do if Python falls apart on them. But at the same
time, I think we're now in a position where we have to balance the general solution with
specialist solution and try and understand that. And for a lot of us, certainly for me,
that's quite new. I'm not entirely comfortable yet with the idea of saying
we need a different solution for this than we have for that. It's something we're all getting
to grips with, I think. And one aspect of this is also sort of kind of related to the
Python is a famously glue language.
So when you're trying to package or use Python,
you're not just using Python.
You're using a whole stack of other languages
and tech stacks along with it.
Photography uses Rops under the hood.
And there's Fortran code in NumPy.
There's all sorts of diverse tooling
underneath what just looks like a Python package.
And that works.
And you are able to use these.
And it also introduces all the challenges
that come with all of those themselves.
So it's...
We're in a good spot.
There's also a long way ahead.
But we're also quite a ways from where we were.
And I think one of the things to bring it around,
what the strategy discussion is doing
is helping us understand where the gaps are right now
and what the most painful points are right now,
which is where the user survey was really helpful
in telling us these are the things
that at least the users that we thought
and who did fill the survey
think the problem and pain points are.
I would say just quick estimate,
looking at the source of the respondents from the survey,
that even these results lean more towards the highly committed software developer side
and data science side of Python and not the super casual user.
Because my example of Sarah in the biology department,
she's not going to PI PI and going up through surveys.
She might see the banner, which is, ah, whatever.
I care about biology or I care about economics, right?
So I think even this should be taken with a bit of a--
- Yep.
I think one of the useful pieces of data
that we did collect was user experience,
like experience level.
And one of the things that I've noted to but not done
is sort of split this survey data that we have
various axes and see if we see other pieces of transparency here.
I don't think any of the people who are active in this space have had the time to dig into
the data.
I, for one, don't have the expertise or skill set to do so.
So one of the things that's really useful is having people look through this data and
come up with new flag themes,
which is a number of people.
It is.
That's very much...
Sorry.
Go ahead, Paul.
I was just going to say,
that's very much a common problem we have
is so many people use Python
who we just have no way of getting in touch with.
We have no way of knowing what their experience is
because why would they talk to us?
You know, it's like you don't go and talk to the engineers who design your car.
You just drive the flipping thing.
And there's an awful lot of people who treat Python like that.
And we can ask, we can put surveys up.
But at the end of the day, like you say, the sort of people who would really, really like to get feedback from simply don't look at these sort of things.
They aren't involved in going on to PyPI.
You know, they type pip install something that the guy across the desk from them told them would work and they never see PyPI.
I was in my workplace.
I was very conscious that we had some people who were dabbling in Python who didn't interact at all with the community, never even contemplated doing so.
And that's with me sitting next to them and saying, hey, Python's cool.
And that's the norm. That's that's the actual Python user.
Anyone who's looking at a survey and responding to it is already in the top 5%.
Yeah.
So.
Yeah, there's a really interesting term that Scott Hanselman came up with called the dark matter developer.
The unseen 99%.
And it's exactly what you're describing here, Paul, is you don't even, you can't reach them because they don't come to the meetups.
They don't come to the conferences.
They don't subscribe to the blog.
They just use it as a tool and go home.
And they shouldn't.
It's not what they're doing.
Yeah.
So some of the best feedback that we do get in these discussions comes from, as well as kind of people who get actual issues reported to them.
So every time the pip maintainers are like, people are reporting this problem all the time.
Okay, we know that's a problem because it's getting to the developers.
but we also get feedback from people who do training and tutorials and people who kind of
manage Python's presence in a workplace, in an organization, because in that position,
and that's kind of the position that I do as well at my work, we get more of that feedback.
We get people complaining about things that they'd never think to take out in public,
but they'll happily put on an internal list somewhere saying, hey, how come Python can't do
this right uh although or they'll ask for help because they actually have a job to do and they
need to get it done and you know we're all getting paid to be there so there's no kind of fear or
shame and saying hey can someone just tell me how to do this and so by being kind of that central
point in that place just the same as when you're teaching a class students are going to say this
didn't work and now you see a problem and when you start seeing the same things over and over again
that becomes kind of useful additional feedback to factor into these kinds of surveys.
And I don't think we've put a lot of weight in kind of the quantitative response here.
Like it's quotes, it's, it's stuff that people have put in the open spaces that, you know,
the ones that have really resonated or been repeated a lot are the ones that we've pulled
out into the discussion and have been working from and kind of the actual numbers is like,
yeah, they could mean anything realistically.
And we can slice them to make them mean whatever we want.
Exactly.
So there's a careful balance there
of drawing the right insights from this,
knowing the limitations of what we've done.
As is probably the case with every single member.
Let me read out some of the...
Oh, sorry, go ahead, Nofek.
And then I'll read off some of the comments
that actually some of the respondents actually made.
But go ahead.
Oh, yeah, no, I was going to say, I agree with Steve that I think since we have no access to these, you know, 99% of actual developers, I think what maps closest to them would be users and industry.
I got companies building applications. Because if you're a user of Python, like kind of by definition, you're writing an app and not really building a library.
So I think that if we hear feedback from people at companies trying to build apps facing hardships, I think that would reflect the main chunk of users.
That is a good point.
I made the distinction that was almost like beginner versus expert.
But really, I guess how I should have phrased it is closer to what you said, Ofec, is people building applications and presentation type things that they never will share with anybody through PyPI or something.
They just want to get it to run.
Maybe they'll deploy it, but they won't publish it.
Versus people building Flask and Pydantic and SQLAlchemy and so on.
These are really different use cases.
So the person building that may be extremely talented and experienced, but they also have different constraints and different goals.
So that's a really good point.
All right.
Some quick respondent thoughts here just from this discussion thread.
So one person says, unify multiple tools.
It's good to have new ideas and new implementation, but it has to converge after a while.
That's pretty interesting.
Number two, there should be one,
and preferably only one obvious way to do it,
get rid of the fragmentation.
Straight out of Xenopython there.
Number three, I definitely want Python
to introduce the one true packaging tool.
Ideally, both as easy as Rust's cargo
and extensible package.
Installing is easy.
Package building is the Wild West.
So that kind of speaks to potentially
the other side of creating in the libraries.
And then the person forward said, blow it all away.
Just everything goes away.
Start over from scratch.
Paul, you had actually a comment here in this discussion
about the historical perspective.
I think I even potentially pulled it up here.
Saying, you know, having pip be exactly this tool
might be really hard because pip has been built
to do certain things and people now rely on it, right?
Yeah, I mean,
Pip is in a very odd position here.
It is, it's shipped with Python
and it's shipped with Python for a very specific reason.
You've got to have something to start the whole process off.
You've got to be able to bootstrap.
And if you use Hatch, how do you get Hatch on your PC?
You need something. And PIT was incorporated into the Python.
It's not technically part of the standard library. It's installed with the standard library.
But let's not go there. But it was incorporated to give you give us that bootstrapping capability.
At the time, that's really all PIT was, was an installer.
It had build capabilities because you needed to build things from source
because that's how you installed a lot of things.
I predated wheels and all that, yeah.
Yeah, wheels were nowhere near as common at the time.
Since then, things have changed, but pip is still the one thing that –
it's where people get into the whole packaging ecosystem.
They have to start by saying pip install.
and I think there's a there's a very good point which was made I mean this is this is January
my opinions change every 15 minutes so that was a long time ago now but there was a good point made
which is that pip is in the position to be that unified tool but it's not what it is now
other tools like Hatch or PDM or Poetry are better at being the workflow tool that people
talk about when they make analogies with Rust and Cargo, for example. But they don't come with Python.
And to balance that problem out and come up with a solution there, we can't just look
at packaging in isolation.
One of the things Conda does,
which is what allows them to solve certain problems
that they solve, but at the same time
is one of the reasons some people
don't find Conda appropriate,
is that it bundles Python.
You install Conda and then use that to install Python.
And that's a fundamentally different way
of getting Python. Rust has a similar thing. You get rust up and that gives you rust and cargo.
The model is there. The model is used in other places. But a change like that is not something
that the packaging community can agree on by themselves. That would involve the core developers,
the steering council, it's a very, very significant change to the whole model.
And I think one of the things that we struggle with,
and one of the things I was sort of trying to get at at this point in the discussion,
was that we're not in a position to do that at the moment.
Maybe we should be.
One of the things coming out of this discussion is a broader look at what can we achieve, what can't we achieve.
But we need to work out how to how to take that forward if we want to.
So. Yeah, I think. pip is in an odd position because a lot of people say, why can't we add this to Pip?
because pip should be the thing to do.
But speaking as a pip maintainer,
I'm not even sure if that's what pip should be doing
because we've got a lot of history.
We've got a lot of legacy code in pip.
It would be a big disruptive change to use as a PIP
to our workflow, whereas Hatch is doing a great job of it.
PDM is doing fine.
Do we want to get into that area?
And that's where, in all honesty, that's where a lot of the discussion started to veer towards big grand philosophy questions.
And I think a lot of people got quite frustrated because they're hard questions and nobody's got an answer and people wanted action.
I think one of the things that came out of the survey was a real sense of urgency.
People said, burn it all down and create something new now.
We want a unified solution now. And that put everybody under a sense of pressure to we ought to be doing better. But the reality is some of these things will take a long time and thinking about them is the first step, which is what we're doing here.
Your analogies that people make, I find very interesting, because some people do come in saying, make it more like Conda, which, as Paul said, kind of sits outside of Python.
But then other people say, make it more like Cargo, make it more like NPM, which kind of have the virtual environment thing built into the packaging tool.
But it still lives inside it.
And we get people coming, always coming in with these assumptions that because pip is part of the standard distributions of Python, I'm choosing those words carefully as a core developer, because it comes with the Python.org distributions, they assume that because it's included, it's going to be like the ones that are included in other languages.
And that's simply not the case.
I mean, we, for starters, we existed well before those did.
So we couldn't have copied, you know, what Rust does or what Node does.
But it's just not.
But having all those requests come in kind of just show that if we did burn it down, we don't even know what people actually want built back in its place.
Yeah.
Because they're all asking for different things.
I think part of the challenge, people are asking for you all to decide.
I got that sense from a lot of this conversation, from some of the feedback, the survey results, was nobody is deciding in the core developer space.
Tell us how to do it.
We'll go with that.
A lot of them would say, obviously, not everyone.
I mean, the C++ and core developers, well, this isn't the most polite way of saying this, but they sort of don't care about packaging.
The Python stream effectively telling us this and saying, you figure it out.
And while there's a bunch of people here who are code developers, they're wearing two hats.
It's not a single hat.
And to jump back in the conversation, I'm sorry, I've done that a few times already.
To the point of Python, Python is a very redistributor-driven distribution model.
Whereas with RustUp, for example, everyone's getting Rust as the Rust team built it.
And as the Rust team packaged it, and it ships to them.
Many people are getting their Python from Homebrew, or from PyEnd and compiling it,
or from ASTF and doing the same thing,
or from Debian who have had it in a bazillion ways.
And a lot of the Python packaging problems
that people keep hitting
are actually these problems in a trench coat.
These are Python distribution problems
that are showing up when we use the packaging tooling.
And that causes a lot of friction there as well.
And solving that as public-tinted ad is the last problem.
And it's also tricky because problems mirror your organization
as we're organized.
We aren't set to solve this.
To be fair to the distributors,
we like distributing Python as source code.
The official release of CPython is a pile of source code
that someone else should build and give to you.
And that's, you know, because that's the GNU model, the Linux model, whichever model it is from 30 years back, is you got your operating system with the software built for it by someone who picked up all those source bundles and built it for you if you didn't do it yourself.
And so it's never really been built around the core team, build the binaries and distribute those.
And it certainly does confuse people because we do do that for Windows and we do do that for macOS because we've been able to because we never had distributors pick those up in the same way.
I think with more Windows users nowadays than we used to have, I think that confusion is much more visible.
The people coming from a Windows background think, well, I get Python from Python.org.
People coming from a Linux background think Python.org has nothing.
I get it from Ubuntu.
Or it's just there.
I don't even know where I get it from.
And I think that's something that is changing.
I don't know if we will ever.
I think languages like Rust with things like RustUp, that's a new model.
And it comes from much more recent how people expect things to be delivered to them.
And Python's got a heck of a lot of history here that isn't as easy to change as people might like to think it is.
I'm not saying we don't.
I'm not saying this isn't a challenge.
I guess to draw an analogy, it's similar to the source distribution versus wheel problem that we solved in some sense.
wherein you can still build your own NumPy,
but the NumPy developers ship a single NumPy
and that has certain choices made
that you can make differently.
I guess I wasn't trying to be combative here.
This is how packaging discussions always go.
This is how packaging discussions.
We always get combative.
We sound like we're arguing
and we were actually agreeing with each other.
Absolutely.
We're still just firing together.
But a big difference.
Oh, sorry.
Go ahead.
I was going to say, in the future,
I would imagine what would be best for users
would be not to download a Python executable that installs,
but rather you would download the workflow tool.
So whatever our version of cargo ends up being,
that's what you would actually download
and install on Windows or Mac.
And that would manage your Python.
In that case, then that would be easier to install for users,
and you wouldn't have the conflict of should pip do everything,
because then it wouldn't be pip we're talking about.
Because right now, if you were to add workflow features to pip,
that's a bit awkward, because pip is in every Python.
So you have multiple workflow tools on your path,
which is a bit odd.
Yeah, then you're tied to figuring out how do I get to the right version of Python
to then ask it the workflow questions.
And what if I get that wrong?
What if 3.10 is not the path that's installed, but why doesn't this work?
And so on and so on.
Yeah.
So a couple of the interesting tools that have been growing a bit in more recent times,
we've had the PY launcher on Windows for a while.
And Brett, unfortunately not here, is maintaining a PY launcher for other platforms as well.
And so there's some suggestion.
I think Brett's actually experimenting a bit with adding some of this functionality into that tool.
So kind of the primary function of the PY tool is you have that one command to launch Python,
and it takes an option to select which version you actually want to run.
So you don't end up with multiple copies on path.
You don't worry about which order they're in.
You just say PY, and you'll get the latest version, whatever the latest version is,
because it can do a more intelligent sort.
Or you say PY-3.10-3.11.
Or has shebangs on Windows even, or you say the version in there?
The Windows one has a lot of extra functionality.
I briefly looked at merging the two and kind of adopting Brett's one for both platforms.
But honestly, the Windows one, like 5% of the functionality is launching Python,
and the other 95% does not exist in the cross-platform one because it exists in the platform itself.
So there's a lot of other stuff that I don't even want to bring up in the Windows one.
But we do already have this extra tool that's getting installed everywhere, that's independently installable, that might be a suitable place to take on some of that workload.
I think the big challenge here, and I don't want to get into the Pip-Conda discussion again, but we have at this point 10 years worth of evidence of what happens when you put out a workflow tool that isn't strictly Python, but will give you Python.
And it hasn't beaten all the other workflow tools.
People still don't want to use the tool that does that.
And so I don't know if we can simply assume that providing that tool or mandating that kind of tool is going to be a winner because it exists.
It's been around for a long time and it's not won.
I think it's proven to be a fantastic experience if it suits you.
That's what Condor...
You listen to a Condor user
and they are massively enthusiastic about it,
but it's because it fits what they want to do.
You listen to somebody who doesn't like Condor
and they're equally frustrated with the choices it makes.
And I think Steve's right.
I think we have to learn all of the lessons,
not just some of the lessons.
And one of the lessons here is that
that sort of everything in one bundle tool is a mixed blessing.
I'm going to call from January because that's right in front of me and it seems very prudent.
Many of the respondents wanting a unified tool will have an implicit assumption that their
preferred workflow will be supported. There are many workflows in the cure and trying to
all of them in a single workflow is quite possibly a non-classable problem.
I don't think anybody responded to the survey saying,
please give a unified workflow tool that doesn't do what I currently do.
Exactly.
Please make what I do not work.
Yes.
Everyone thinks their own workflow is normal and everyone else is the weird one.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I do want to, speaking of workflows, I was,
as I was thinking through this process and thinking of like, well,
what might, what might an option be?
What might some other tool look like?
You all talk a lot about in this,
in the surveys and in the responses about a user experience. Right.
And we've,
we've got certainly notable people in the community who are well known for
creating APIs that just connect with folks. Right.
So I put together this idea of, well, what if there was a few more commands in Python itself that you didn't even have to think about?
Do I have pip?
Does it use a hatch under the covers or does it not?
What if you had things like Python init, Python add requests, Python upgrade all, Python build?
And I think you just misplaced hatch, haven't you?
I probably have.
You spelled hatch with a P-Y-T-H-O-N.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, but I don't know if this is going to be solved.
I don't think if pip is there.
I'm almost afraid to put this up here as a proposal
because if it got adopted, then it might be the way,
and I don't like it.
I don't know if I would like it,
but have you thought to go this far to say,
we're not even going to talk about the tools
that make this happen.
This might be pip plus hatch making this happen behind the scenes.
You might set an environment variable that says,
please use poetry when you do this stuff,
but I don't want to talk or know about poetry.
I just want the output of it.
Just Python install.
That's all you tell them.
Versus pip install -r requirements.txt.
Oh, I meant pip three.
Wait, pip three doesn't exist.
Why doesn't pip three exist?
On and on and on, right?
And then if you want to do more, you use hatch or use pip-tools or
insane not insane what do you think i'd use that i mean i think there is a quite like steve said
this is this is almost hatch um make makeup is the one i'm looking at and thinking please give it to
me now but it's almost hatch the question is whether hatch is where it is or pdm or poetry
or whether it's Python.
If you want it to be the Python command,
then I think there's a whole...
We're way too far through this now
to talk about the role of the PyPA
and how it links to the core developers.
But there's a whole disconnect that we struggle with
and we continue to struggle with,
which is what can we do in packaging and what do we need the core to be involved with?
Pradyan mentioned earlier Python core, defer packaging decisions to the PyPA and to the packaging people,
which is great as long as it works. But when it doesn't, when we need to integrate more,
we're not really there yet in knowing how to address that sort of thing.
So I think a tool that does something like that, it's certainly what I'm looking for.
It's certainly what I think a lot of people see when they say workflow tool.
And as I say, we've got people like Hatch and PDM and Poetry making that a reality.
You just made people.
Pardon?
You just made tools into people.
Yeah, sorry.
I don't know all the names.
But yeah, we have people making that sort of thing happen in the different tools around.
Unifying is a question that I think we need to look at.
And there's a clear message that having 10 different tools that do this sort of workflow is not what people want.
But we don't know quite what the best model is yet.
So there's some work to do there.
The massive danger, Paul, is if you pick one
and it turns out to not be really that great.
Yeah.
Which we've been burnt by before.
Many times.
So it makes us a lot more hesitant to pick something.
I think all I'll say on this is,
yeah, there's tools out there doing a lot of this.
The best way to get it adopted into Core Python
is have a tool that is clearly the winner
that we can integrate that tool directly.
And so the transition path becomes if you're using Python 3.36
or whatever version it makes it into, then you have Python that command.
If you want to work with a previous version, then first you install, let's say,
hatch, and you use hatch that command.
And this is the kind of thing that might get integrated into that PY launcher
I mentioned before because we have more ability to add more random commands to that.
All of these are valid Python commands today.
So people could theoretically be running these commands already
and having it do something.
I'm clearly not doing what you intend here,
but they're all valid commands.
So we can't just push out a minor update that breaks them.
The only thing we do need to watch, sorry, with that,
is something that Pradian mentioned in his blog post,
which is we want to see a winner in one sense,
But we want to be very careful not to end up in a competitive situation where rather than working together to get to the ideal workflow, we're working against each other.
It's not going to be good for users.
It's not going to be good for the tool developers.
It's not going to be good for the community if we're all trying to compete with each other on, I've got this whizzy new feature.
We want to work together.
And I think we want, I hesitate to use the word a winner,
but we want a clear sort of best of breed that we can promote
because, as we've said, we've been so burned by saying
this is what we should use and having everything go horribly wrong
that we're very reluctant to do that without evidence.
So we want to see something become that--
that not just--
--tool that people want, but--
--unambiguous, which is going to get difficult as long
as we have competing solutions where it's like, oh, now we're
split 50-50.
And now what?
They're both decent solutions.
Whichever you pick makes half the ecosystem angry.
Yeah.
Yeah, but I think it is important to eventually get help from Core Python.
I know we were just talking about how Kanda has been around for a decade,
and that workflow tool hasn't won.
But if a decade ago on Python.org you had that tool,
I think that would have won.
It is just about advertising it on Core Python.
So eventually we'll need their assistance.
Yeah, that's a really good point, indeed.
We definitely do want to make it work from the core Python side.
I might be the least kind of conflicted core developer here.
So I can say that we do want to make this work.
It's just seen as kind of outside of the core runtime responsibilities.
One of the massive discussion threads actually kicked off because I mistakenly thought the
steering council kind of owned responsibility for packaging and delegated it officially to the pipe
pa but it turns out i was wrong and and they just don't cover packaging at all and so packaging is
kind of outside of core focus entirely and and so it's it's officially not it's officially not cared
for by the core developers not unofficially not cared for if that makes sense it's like we do care
about it we do want it to work we do want it to be a good experience because we know it's critical
to the overall Python experience,
but it's also just scoped out of being our job,
which is why we don't hold up releases based on packaging
and to get packaging features into the core runtime
is just, it just feels like a huge amount of work to do
because it's got to overcome that this is so important
to the core runtime, to the reference interpreter
that it's got to be in there,
even though it's a packaging thing.
So it's challenging,
but there's definitely those of us
who want to make it happen.
And one of the benefits of being outside of the language
is that it can move faster.
Python has an annual release cycle
compared to, to draw an analogy,
the Rust plus Cargo story of six weeks.
And also not having this be in the core language
makes it possible for alternative platforms
and implementations that don't exist that CPython does not care about today to support those
things. Wasm, which is a field three, support PEP 11 for anyone who cares about where that word comes from.
That paradigm exists. It runs things. CPython compiles on Wasm and it runs things.
the packaging story for python in the browser is going to be very different uh the development
workflow of python in the browser is going to be very different and if you try to shout poetry and
tape or those specific rules as currently shaped into those workflows it's just not going to work
And you also don't want to do that avenue of innovation using these tools.
Or that's one of the pieces that is sort of a symptom of success or a problem of success,
which is Hatch, poetry, PBM, all of these exist because the other problems have been solved well
enough. And they've been solved well enough that these are now the main points.
and
they're innovating in this space
and there's other aspects of Python
getting innovated on
in terms of where it runs
in terms of how you interact with it
even
and as long as we don't stifle those
we're doing fine
yeah
and that's a really good point about
not being in the core distribution as well
like if
if the ability to
you know
install packages was considered a core feature of the runtime,
we wouldn't be able to release the runtime for a new platform until we'd figured that out.
Because that would block the release, because we'd have to say Python is incomplete
until it has a complete packaging story on this brand new platform.
So because that is separated, we can release Python.
And so we have WASM releases of the CPython runtime,
because packaging is not part of that.
And so we don't have to wait for that to come up.
And yeah, because it's independent, Anaconda can come along and build PyScript and build packaging around the runtime because it doesn't have to be tightly integrated into it.
So there's big advantages.
Like there's a reason we pulled disto tools out of the core library because it was restricting things.
And so it opens up more things, but it does put more responsibility on distributors, essentially, to build a distribution of Python.
and that includes the workflow tools, the packaging tools,
the indexes, the repositories, whatever they need
to give users of that distribution a good experience.
And ultimately, a lot of this comes down to our distributions
from python.org have a very, very basic story for this.
Like we have pip, that's basically our entire story.
Linux distros have their own story, which again,
is they keep a very narrow focus on what they want to care about.
and users want things outside of that.
Even condo users, very kind of narrow focus
to what's in those repositories.
And when you try and go outside of that,
then things start breaking down
just the same as all the distributions do.
So it's got pluses and minuses.
Python gets into places where it otherwise couldn't
if packaging was a core feature of the runtime.
But it does mean that packaging is determined
by the distribution and not by the core team.
and not even by the core maintainers of the kind of satellite projects that are really,
really close to the core runtime because setup tools can't determine how a WASM build is going
to work because they're not controlling that distribution. So there's a separation of roles
that is not really clear, even to most of us who are involved, if I'm honest, that we all have
different jobs to do and someone has to pull it all together. And unfortunately, a lot of the time
It's the end user has to connect the dots.
Well, I think guys, we are out of time, I would say,
although not out of discussion points for sure.
This could just go on and on.
Absolutely.
Super interesting conversation.
It's really great to see it getting this focus.
But yeah, it's going to be interesting to see where it goes.
It's a challenge.
But I really like your ideas that we're going to rise to it.
We've solved the hard enough problems now that this new thing is a problem.
Ofak, go ahead.
I have one quick question because I'm sure listeners would be curious too.
What do we think the next steps either are or should be for this?
I know we split off into different discussions and we're trying to research the feedback that we got,
but what do we think the next steps are?
Or is that just the next step, just trying to understand what users want more?
I don't think we know yet.
Okay.
Yeah, I mean, I've written far too many posts on where I think we've got to go next,
but I do think we still have to, as Prajian mentioned earlier, level set.
There's a lot of people involved.
We all have different backgrounds, different expectations, different experiences,
and we just need to talk and figure that out.
And it's the kind of thing that would be ideal
for us all to fly to some remote island somewhere for a week
and just hash it all out in person.
That's unfortunately not going to happen.
So long discourse threads.
We're not leaving Hawaii until we solve this.
We've got to stay here for three months.
I will do it.
Three months later, we're still there.
Yeah.
absolutely all right well you all thank you so much for being here thanks for taking the time
and participating in this first the original discussion and then this here as well i think
it's going to highlight a lot of interesting and unseen aspects for people final word
listeners out there they want to get maybe their feedback in we saw some folks in the audience
asking how they take the survey the survey is closed i'll give you a chance to sort of say like
What next for the people out there listening?
Steve, we'll go around the circle again.
You're the top of it.
If you're still on Twitter,
then you can mention me in a tweet at Zuba.
I do read those,
and I do collect a lot of random information
and ideas out of there.
Otherwise, discourse and start a discussion,
and don't be surprised if we point you at an existing one
and say we've done this one to death already.
So I'm always happy to hear more.
And I guess just be aware that we do get very overloaded.
Sure. Paul?
Yeah, I think that's probably about the situation.
Again, I'm not very active on social media.
You can probably ping me on Twitter or Mastodon,
and I might notice.
Certainly get involved. I can't promise. Certainly get involved on Discord.
I think a lot of people are put off joining the conversations because it feels quite a hostile environment.
There's a lot of like Steve said, we've seen that before. We do want new perspectives.
We do want people offering ideas. And it's hard. It's hard. It's hard to speak up because there's so much history that people will assume, you know, and you won't.
But please do, you know, come with half-baked ideas.
We'll maybe tell you how to bake them.
We'll maybe tell you we've already covered them, but we won't ignore them.
We'll see them.
And even if it looks like we're not picking up on things that you think are really important, they'll get in the pot.
We will be aware of them.
And that's the main thing.
What we want more than anything is to be aware of what people think.
Yeah.
Perfect.
I agree with what's been said.
I'm always on the discourse forums, reading feedback,
and if any Twitter threads gain popularity,
I think it's important to realize most people that work on this
are volunteers at the end of the day,
so we might not have much time to iterate as fast as people want,
but we are trying our best for sure.
Excellent.
And there was that big sponsorship
to make a major progress on PyPI.org.
Maybe we'll see something like that at some point.
Pradyan, you get the final word here.
That's literally what I was going to say.
Invest in Python, folks.
If you work somewhere that uses Python,
tell them to invest in the language.
And part of why we're having these discussions
is because the role that initiated the user service
is a sponsored role from Bloomberg.
And these sorts of investments into the ecosystem
are vital to sort of make things keep working
because there's only so far we can go with
a bunch of people doing this in their evenings
when they're, you know, slightly sort of bored
and kind of want to keep themselves busy.
And these tough problems are not going to solve themselves
because someone had half an hour in their evening
or an hour in their evening.
Yep.
All right.
Good point.
And thank you all for being here.
Thanks.